# Pitt Disability Studies Flyer - Spring 2022

This flyer was created for an Integrating Writing and Design course, as part of a mini competition to create a flyer for the emerging disability studies program at Pitt. This flyer won and was subsequently circulated by the program to advertise its spring courses. All images were created by me, Lynn Priestley, in Adobe Illustrator. The following description of its overall creation process is pulled from my course's final portfolio gloss on this design:

"I wanted to create a flyer that played with what is many able-bodied people’s reference point for conceptualizing disability: accessibility signage. I opted for a blue, white, and black color palette to evoke the blue and white contrast of ISA signs and used rounded rectangles for text box backgrounds to further reference the signs. Under the main heading of the flyer, I included a visual pattern of Braille, that, if functional, was a translation of the heading it sat below. I recreated the four most commonly seen accessibility icons in Adobe Illustrator and tried to creatively match them to the course they corresponded to (although I kept the ASL sign for interpreter as it is, to maintain accuracy). All of these decisions were made with the intention of, at first glance, looking like what many associate with disability; however, as soon as the reader looked a bit further, they would be pulled in by all of these predictable elements having something different about them to subvert expectation. I wanted these choices, like the change to the ISA icon, to loudly proclaim that disability is not a monolithic experience completely represented by one icon. Disabled people are diverse and complex and deserve all the representation able-bodied people get, including the opportunity to be shown in subversively playful contexts.

There were also several accessibility-based design choices I made for this flyer, including checking my color palette had high enough contrast and making sure color was not a primary factor in creating meaning for the poster. I also ensured that the text was a minimum of 12pt, left-aligned, and had a line length of less than 70 characters for maximum readability. During revision, I decided that the way I could improve this design was to make its PDF form accessible to screen readers. To do this, I set all my paragraph styles to have tags (H1-H6 or P) that, when exported, would establish a hierarchy of information for the screen reader, by allowing it to understand the overall outline of the flyer’s text. I also anchored images in their logical place in the text flow and gave them custom alt text, so the screen reader would read that image’s description after the text it belongs with. I also kept the alt text below 125 characters to prevent screen readers from cutting information off. The next thing I did was use the Articles panel to hand set the reading order for the screen reader, since some things, like the text at a 90° angle, are positioned in a way that is not automatically logical for screen reader. I also set the document language and added file metadata, so the file could display a document title instead of a filename in PDF form. When opened in Acrobat, the PDF title will read “Disability Studies Flyer – Spring 2022” instead of “PriestleyLynn-inclusive-accessiblePDF.pdf”, avoiding any confusion about what the file is from the start. After a few tweaks in Acrobat to finalize all the above work done in InDesign, I ran Acrobat’s accessibility check to check my work.

With this project, I was excited to have another opportunity to practice my accessible PDF techniques. I felt that, although it wasn’t a visual overhaul, it was good practice to focus on the design aspects that are not visual. Our society is one of ocularcentrism, so it makes visual ability bias prominent in design. It was interesting to write the alt text and design the experience from a completely non-visual standpoint."
